WHY IT MATTERS TO ENMAX
As a future-oriented essential electricity service
provider, we are committed to advancing a cleaner
energy future for the benefit of our customers, the
communities we operate in and our Shareholder,
The City of Calgary. For many years, the reduction
of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions has been a key
component of our environmental protection and
stewardship practices.
OUR APPROACH
ENMAX has committed to achieving net-zero scope 1
and scope 2 GHG emissions by 2050. As a milestone
towards achieving our net-zero vision, we plan to reduce
or offset 70 per cent of our scope 1 and scope 2 GHG
emissions by 2030 from a 2015 baseline. To reach these
targets, we are identifying efficiencies at our natural gas
power generation facilities, offsetting and managing
emissions from our corporate and operational buildings,
and advancing the electrification of our mobile fleet.
Evolving our generation portfolio
We have already achieved significant emissions
reductions over the past decade due to the transition of
our power generation portfolio. When compared to our
2015 baseline, we have reduced the GHG emissions by
66 per cent. Today, we hold no coal‐fired generation in
our portfolio, and our power generation facilities are
a combination of modern natural gas-fuelled power
generation facilities and wind facilities.
GHG emissions across our business
Today, the vast majority of our GHG emissions
come from our natural gas power generation facilities.
Our primary source of GHG emissions is natural gas
combustion at these plants, followed by a smaller
proportion originating from natural gas and electricity
consumption at our corporate and operational buildings,
together with fuel combustion within our mobile fleet
(see table at right).
2021 HIGHLIGHTS
→ Completed a turbine upgrade and maintenance event at Shepard
Energy Centre that added 11 new megawatts (MW) of generation.
→ Met our target to offset 100% of our building GHG emissions
(scope 1 and scope 2) for 2021.
GHG emissions
GHG EMISSIONS (SCOPE 1 AND SCOPE 2)
CONTRIBUTIONS BY EACH BUSINESS 2021
Power generation 99%
Operational and corporate buildings 0.9%
Mobile fleet 0.1%
OUR PERFORMANCE
2015 2021
51%
natural gas
86%
natural gas
9%
renewables
14%
renewables
40%
coal
Our largest power generation facility, Shepard
Energy Centre, is the most efficient natural
gas-fuelled combined-cycle generation facility
operating in Canada today, as measured by
tonnes of CO₂ per megawatt hour (MWh).
ENMAX 2021
ENVIRONMENTAL, SOCIAL
& GOVERNANCE REPORT CEO LET TER ESG SCORECARD ABOUT ENMAX SOCIAL GOVERNANCE TCFD APPENDICES
16
ENVIRONMENT
PROGRESS IN 2021
We are taking the following steps toward achieving
our GHG emissions reduction target:
Efficiency improvements at our natural
gas power generation facilities
While natural gas is one of the lowest carbon emitting
fossil fuel options available for power generation,
we are proactively working to find efficiencies and
incremental improvements that further reduce our
GHG emissions intensity.
HYBRID ELECTRIC GAS TURBINE COMMISSIONED
In May 2021, we commissioned Canada’s first hybrid
electric gas turbine at our Crossfield Energy Centre.
By combining a new battery energy storage system
with our existing natural gas-fuelled turbine, the hybrid
asset allows us to provide standby power (spinning
reserve) without producing emissions from natural gas
generation. When a grid operator requests the standby
power, the battery provides the initial supply while the
turbine ramps up to meet the longer duration demand.
Since the unit went into use, it has avoided the
generation of more than 31,000 tonnes carbon dioxide
equivalent (CO₂e) that would have been emitted if
those power dispatches had been provided by the
non-hybridized natural gas turbine. ENMAX is leading
the way in adopting and implementing this technology
for the first time in Canada.
In 2021, our Generation Fleet Efficiency
Program was recognized in Electricity
Canada's (formerly known as the
Canadian Electricity Association)
Centre of Excellence.
TURBINE UPGRADES
As part of our ongoing efforts to improve operational
efficiencies, we completed a turbine upgrade and
maintenance event in 2021 at Shepard Energy Centre
that added 11 new megawatts (MW) of generation
capacity while recovering an additional 6 MW. This
further increased the efficiency at Shepard—already
one of Canada's most efficient combined-cycle
facilities. A similar upgrade and maintenance event
is planned for our Calgary Energy Centre in 2022.
STEAM TEMPERATURE EFFICIENCY
At our Calgary Energy Centre, we completed a project
to increase steam cycle temperatures. This collaboration
between a number of vendors and our multidisciplinary
team optimized this operational process. The project
resulted in additional facility output and an overall
efficiency improvement. Efficiency improvements
translate directly into less natural gas burn required
and reduced GHG emissions.
ENMAX 2021
ENVIRONMENTAL, SOCIAL
& GOVERNANCE REPORT CEO LET TER ESG SCORECARD ABOUT ENMAX SOCIAL GOVERNANCE TCFD APPENDICES
17
ENVIRONMENT
Offsetting and managing emissions
from our buildings
ENMAX currently owns or leases six office and
operational buildings in Alberta and 157 substations
across Alberta and Maine. As part of our commitment
to reducing our emissions from buildings, we continue
to invest in:
OFFSETTING OUR BUILDING EMISSIONS
ENMAX has been purchasing ECOLOGO® certified
renewable energy certificates for the past 10 years
to offset 100 per cent of ENMAX Place (head office)
scope 2 GHG emissions. In 2020, we set a target to
offset 100 per cent of our building GHG emissions
(scope 1 and scope 2) from 2021 onwards. In alignment
with our target ENMAX purchased ECOLOGO®
certified renewable energy certificates and voluntary
carbon offsets for our 2020 building emissions
inventory to support this commitment. Offset
purchases for 2021 will be finalized in Q3 2022.
SUBSTATIONS MONITORING
Sulfur hexafluoride (SF₆) is a gas used as an
electrical insulator in high-voltage switchgear found
in substations. Since SF₆ is a powerful GHG, ENMAX
Power closely monitors and reports all SF₆ releases
and has stringent SF₆ management practices in place.
Since 79 per cent of ENMAX Power substations have
SF₆ gas insulated breakers, this gas is monitored
by automated alarms and investigated by crews
immediately. Any gas loss is documented as part
of our regular inspection and reporting process.
Additionally, we proactively replace seals to lower the
probability of SF₆ leaks from equipment and closely
follow industry research to explore alternatives to
SF₆ gas. Versant Power assets include 117 substations.
Only 35 per cent of those substations have breakers
with SF₆. Versant Power maintains strict control
measures to closely manage SF₆ gas releases from
its substations and replaces breakers when possible.
Electrifying our mobile fleet
We have a mobile fleet of 348 vehicles in Alberta that
are primarily used to allow our crews to inspect, maintain
and repair our transmission and distribution lines,
several substations and control centres. Some of these
vehicles are also used by our meter readers, community
investment team members and for other corporate
services. Of this mobile fleet, approximately 39 per cent
of vehicles are light duty, 39 per cent medium duty and
23 per cent heavy duty. Last year, we announced our
aspirational goal to electrify 100 per cent of our mobile
fleet by 2030. As a milestone, we set an interim target to
electrify 35 per cent of our mobile fleet by 2025. Despite
some challenges related to market availability of electric
vehicles (EVs) (arising from pandemic-related global
supply chain and labour shortages, among other issues)
and components (chip shortages), we advanced toward
these targets by:
MOBILE FLEET ELECTRIFICATION PLAN
We developed a three-year mobile fleet electrification
plan that includes our investment in both asset
replacement and charging infrastructure. The document
outlines our phased approach and intended annual
progress toward achieving our 2025 electrification
target. The plan will be reviewed annually and updated
as technology and market conditions change.
TESTING NEW TECHNOLOGY
For our medium-duty mobile fleet, we field-tested an
Electric Power Takeoff (e-PTO). An e-PTO combines a
battery pack, electric motor and hydraulic pump that
can raise and lower the boom on a work truck without
using diesel. Using e-PTOs would reduce mobile fleet
emissions (as well as noise on the job site) since they
run on battery power rather than idling the truck’s
diesel engine.
ADVANCING OUR MOBILE FLEET ELECTRIFICATION PILOT
We entered the second year of our demonstration project
to test EV technology on two medium-duty trucks within
our mobile fleet. Read more on the next page.
GHG EMISSIONS (EQUITY)
kilotonnes of CO₂e | tonnes CO₂/MWh
While our emissions intensity remains unchanged over the past four
years, our absolute emissions have increased by 24 per cent since
2017. Absolute GHG emissions are directly correlated with the degree
of utilization of our assets and our natural gas facilities have very high
utilization rates.
Notes:
In 2020, we changed the method of consolidation of our GHG emissions. Before
this, we reported 100 per cent of the GHG emissions from the facilities we operated,
regardless of financial ownership (operational control approach under the GHG
Protocol). We have now switched to the equity approach to better reflect financial
risks and rewards. Our target baseline (2015) and all data in this chart has been
restated using the equity approach.
Our GHG emissions are composed predominantly of CO₂. While we include SF₆ in
our GHG emissions, it represents less than one per cent of our scope 1 emissions.
Emissions from our substations include all SF₆ releases but only a portion of electricity
and natural gas combustion, since not all substations are directly metered.
This data excludes Versant Power. The primary source of Versant Power’s GHG
emissions is gas and diesel combustion from its mobile fleet. The company’s mobile
fleet includes 140 smaller-class vehicles and approximately 120 medium- and
heavy-duty vehicles.
OUR PERFORMANCE
4,500
2017 2018 2019 2020
Scope 1 Scope 2 GHG intensity
0 0.00
0.40
0.36
17.7
14.0 13.6 24.9 24.0
2,514 2,885 2,905 2,975 3,125
0.37 0.37
0.35
0.37
2021
ENMAX 2021
ENVIRONMENTAL, SOCIAL
& GOVERNANCE REPORT CEO LET TER ESG SCORECARD ABOUT ENMAX SOCIAL GOVERNANCE TCFD APPENDICES
18
ENVIRONMENT
Recognized as an important part of global
decarbonization, vehicle electrification is rapidly
gaining momentum as electric vehicle (EV) technology
continues to advance and build future market
demand. At ENMAX, we are working towards the full
electrification of our mobile fleet by 2030. Adopting
EVs into our mobile fleet not only reduces GHG
emissions—it also demonstrates the viability of EVs in
industrial applications and Calgary’s weather conditions
and allows us to better understand the impact of
transportation electrification on our electricity system.
A key way we are progressing toward our target is by
advancing our medium-duty mobile fleet electrification
pilot. Initiated in 2019 with funding from Emissions
Reductions Alberta, the demonstration project—the
first of its kind in Canada—is testing two medium-duty
(under 10,000 pounds) fully-electric work trucks within
our mobile fleet. The project could see mobile fleet fuel
consumption reduced by an estimated 4,300 litres of
diesel per vehicle annually.
Pilot moves to phase two
In the initial phase of the pilot, the truck chassis and
body were built and delivered in spring 2022. In early
fall 2021, we also installed and put into service two
charging stations at our South Service Centre to help
us track the performance and usage of the battery and
charging infrastructure.
In the second phase of the pilot (now underway)
the trucks were fully assembled, delivered to ENMAX,
and put directly into operational duty in April 2022.
As the trucks are being used, we are analyzing their
capacity and performance in various conditions. This
includes driving the vehicles in extreme temperatures
to determine the effects on range, testing how long
the battery lasts with tools in use, and taking trips on
less than a full charge.
As the pilot progresses, we will continue to actively
engage with suppliers, other utilities and vehicle
manufacturers to support the development of the
specialized EVs needed to meet our goals.
Our plan for mobile fleet electrification,
which includes our medium-duty pilot,
was recognized in Electricity Canada's
Centre of Excellence in 2021.
SPOTLIGHT
Medium-duty pilot advances
mobile fleet electrification
One of the two medium-duty fully-electric work
trucks we are testing within our mobile fleet.
ENVIRONMENT
ENMAX 2021
ENVIRONMENTAL, SOCIAL
& GOVERNANCE REPORT
19
CEO LET TER ESG SCORECARD ABOUT ENMAX SOCIAL GOVERNANCE TCFD APPENDICES
Customer emissions
As part of our essential role in the energy transition,
we are committed to first reducing our own impacts
and working to help reduce our customers’ emissions
and costs related to energy consumption over time.
In our interactions with customers, we will continue to
help them better understand and manage their energy
usage and support renewable energy solutions that
meet their needs, aspirations and expectations.
ENERGY USE
We offer My Energy IQ™, a free tool that provides
information and reports that enable customers to
make informed decisions and better manage their
energy use. All residential and small business ENMAX
Energy customers have convenient access to the
My Energy IQ™ tools, reports and insights as part of
their ENMAX Energy online account. My Energy IQ™
enables customers to see how their home compares
to similar homes nearby, build a customized savings
plan, receive tips tailored to their home, see bill
comparisons and historical use charts, learn what
consumes the most energy in their home and how
weather impacts consumption.
ELECTRICITY OR NATURAL GAS GREEN ADD-ON
ENMAX Energy offers “green add-on” selections for
customers to pay an additional variable fee (the amount
is chosen by the customer). For electricity consumption,
this fee goes towards the purchase of certified
Renewable Energy Certificates that support renewable
energy generation, and for natural gas consumption this
fee goes towards the purchase of carbon offsets.
LOWER CARBON EMISSIONS HEATING
Versant Power encourages customers to switch from
using fossil fuels for home heating to using electric heat
pumps. Since Maine’s grid sources about 79 per cent
of its electricity from renewable sources such as wind,
solar, hydroelectric and biomass, switching to heat
pumps results in lower emissions.
In our interactions with customers,
we will continue to help them better
understand and manage their energy
usage and support renewable energy
solutions that meet their needs,
aspirations and expectations.
SOLAR INSTALLATIONS
As renewable generation continues to expand in
Alberta, solar remains the largest source of total
installed micro-generation capacity [under five
megawatts (MW) in size] at 112 MW as at the end of
2021¹ and ENMAX Energy continues to maintain our
position as one of Alberta’s leading micro-generation
solar installers and retailers with more than 37 MW
installed to date. To continue to offer valuable and
requested services for our customers, and in response
to market drivers, ENMAX Energy will be relaunching
our residential and small commercial solar program in
2022. The rooftop solar program will offer competitive
pricing and end-to-end customer service through
ENMAX Energy. To meet the increasing demand from
our larger customers to help meet their ESG goals,
we are also exploring renewable electricity sale
agreements from utility-scale solar projects.
On a larger scale, customers in municipalities
across Alberta have partnered with ENMAX for
their solar needs, including 18 MW of installed solar
at 58 locations such as Calgary’s Shepard Solar Park,
Bearspaw Water Treatment Plant and Southland
Leisure Centre, to name just a few. In 2021, ENMAX
completed and energized the City of Leduc Protective
Services’ 88.8 kilowatt (kW) rooftop array and the
Town of Calmar Arena’s 185 kW rooftop array. Toward
the end of 2021, ENMAX initiated the Community
Solar Fund, providing selected Calgary community
associations with rooftop solar installations at
their facilities.
There are currently 11 projects in progress (totalling
approximately 950 kW), with an additional 15 community
associations scheduled in 2022 and an additional
expected ~2,200 kW of solar to be installed
across Calgary.
INTEGRATING DISTRIBUTED GENERATION INTO THE GRID
Across the state of Maine, Versant Power is currently
supporting more than 200 distributed generation
projects through their development stages—from
application, engineering studies, design and
construction to establishing detailed billing. This
involves integrating these renewable projects safely
and efficiently within Maine’s existing grid and is an
important part of advancing ENMAX and Versant
Power’s shared vision of a cleaner energy future.
¹ https://www.aeso.ca/market/market-and-system-reporting/micro-and-small-distributed-generation-reporting/
ENMAX 2021
ENVIRONMENTAL, SOCIAL
& GOVERNANCE REPORT CEO LET TER ESG SCORECARD ABOUT ENMAX SOCIAL GOVERNANCE TCFD APPENDICES
20
ENVIRONMENT
WHY IT MATTERS TO ENMAX
Nearly every aspect of modern life relies on electricity.
As an operator of transmission and distribution
electricity systems, ENMAX Power is advancing
technology solutions that will meet customer electricity
needs today and into the future. Our electricity grid
must continue to deliver power reliably, while enabling
the transition to diverse energy sources, withstanding
increasingly severe weather events and adapting to
changing customer expectations.
OUR APPROACH
To provide customers with the critical and dependable
energy they need, we manage a complex system
of infrastructure, equipment and software. We have
advanced our ability to predict, detect and respond to
outages and are planning and integrating a series of
innovative technology solutions to ensure our grid is
prepared for the future.
We are advancing technology solutions
that will meet customer electricity needs
today and into the future.
Leveraging data analytics
We also use predictive programs and processes to
strengthen the reliability of our system, including:
PLANNING FOR LOAD CAPACITY
To support reliable service to customers, we use load
capacity planning to identify the existing constraints
and upcoming demands on Calgary’s electricity system
(loads) and to verify that redundancies are in place.
Our interactive Load Capacity Map uses an ENMAXdeveloped
load forecasting model to help communicate
the estimated available capacity throughout our
distribution system. Using the map, customers can
search for an address to quickly identify the system’s
available capacity.
SIMPLIFYING ACCESS TO COMPLEX DATA
In 2021, ENMAX Power developed a System Load
Analyzer, an automated approach to identify the
customer load at risk under a single unplanned outage
using software. Similar to other distribution load flow
software, all the different parts of the system (fuses,
voltage step-down transformers, switches, overhead
and underground conductors) are modeled as sections.
Nodes are used to connect sections together and to
represent electrical information such as voltage and
current. Incorporating a programming language, Python,
enabled us to connect the various data sources and
display the information in Microsoft Power BI, a tool
already in ENMAX’s IT environment and accessible to all
business units. The resulting platform—called the Digital
Twin—is now used by many groups across ENMAX
Power to view data and gain insights more efficiently.
2021 HIGHLIGHTS
→ Invested $4.5 million in 2021 to enable a more resilient grid.
→ Advanced our EV smart charging pilot to understand how Calgarians
use EVs and the potential impact on our electricity system.
Grid reliability
and resiliency
ENMAX 2021
ENVIRONMENTAL, SOCIAL
& GOVERNANCE REPORT CEO LET TER ESG SCORECARD ABOUT ENMAX SOCIAL GOVERNANCE TCFD APPENDICES
21
ENVIRONMENT
SPOTLIGHT
Delivering power reliably
Strong reliability is linked to building sufficient
capacity across the system, but also to our ability to
prevent, withstand and recover rapidly from system
disruptions. We are strengthening the reliability of
our system through:
VISUAL INSPECTIONS
We regularly conduct ground line visual inspections to
provide a bottom-up look at our assets in Alberta and
Maine. Typically, one to two inspectors complete these
vehicle or foot patrol assessments from the road with
binoculars and often use infrared or corona scanning
to look for any signs of degradation. These inspections
also include wood pole condition assessments in which
we make a small drill hole to determine pole strength
and whether there is any rot.
DRONES
In Maine, drones are increasingly being used to provide
top-down inspections of transmission lines in right of
ways. Versant Power has 1,270 miles of transmission
lines, 900 of which are in a right-of-way. The drones can
provide an extremely detailed 360-degree look at the
assets, identifying micro-cracks in porcelain insulators,
and collecting valuable data.
THERMAL AND ACOUSTIC
As electrical connections loosen there is a
resistance to current that can cause an increase
in temperature. In Maine, we use thermal imaging
cameras to look for these hot spots which can cause
components to fail. We also complete acoustic
assessments on our transmission lines, which
‘listen’ for devices that are slowly breaking down
and thereby giving off radio frequency.
TREE AND VEGETATION MANAGEMENT
We use a combination of methods—depending on the
voltage of the line—to provide the most effective longterm
vegetation control, including manual tree control,
brush mowing, tree trimming within the right-of-way
and herbicide application. The aim is to remove danger
trees that can impact our wires before storms take them
down. Part of this work is to reclaim the full width of the
right-of-way if it has become narrowed over time.
COVERED CONDUCTOR PROGRAM
Each year in Maine, Versant Power analyzes line
sections (one to two miles) with low reliability metrics
and installs covered conductors. If a tree falls on a
bare wire, it can result in an outage. With covered
conductors, the insulation protects the wire so there
is no short.
REPLACING AGING ASSETS
Each year, certain assets undergo major maintenance
or replacement as part of ENMAX Power and Versant
Power’s Capital Asset Replacement Program. This
program helps our assets run optimally and minimizes
the occurrence of outages. Assets are prioritized based
on condition and other risks.
INSPECTIONS
MAINTENANCE & REPAIRS
22
ENMAX 2021
ENVIRONMENTAL, SOCIAL
& GOVERNANCE REPORT CEO LET TER ESG SCORECARD ABOUT ENMAX ENVIRONMENT SOCIAL GOVERNANCE TCFD APPENDICES
Measuring our reliability
ENMAX Power is committed to delivering power
safely and reliably. In Alberta, we operate under Alberta
Reliability Standards—the requirements followed by
the Alberta Electric System Operator and all electricity
market participants in the province to maintain high
reliability within the Alberta Interconnected Electric
System. We deliver reliability levels that are top quartile
in Canada (see data from Electricity Canada (EC)
in the sidebar).
In Maine, Versant Power has improved across all
reliability metrics over the last few years (see table
below). To meet increased customer expectations for
power reliability, Versant Power currently invests more
than $70 million USD annually (approximately $87 million
CAD) to maintain and improve its distribution system.
Managing and communicating
outages
ENMAX Power's Outage Management System
estimates the origin of an outage in order to efficiently
dispatch a service person to the location for restoration.
The system also automatically identifies and posts
outage information for customers via Twitter and on
an integrated website map (the Calgary Outage Portal
Map), which shows unplanned outages occurring
real-time and within the last 24 hours.
Minimizing the impact of outages
Despite our best efforts, some of our customers
experience power outages. To minimize the impact
on our customers, we invest in:
AUTOMATED OUTAGE RESTORATION
To substantially reduce the duration of outages and
the number of customers affected, approximately
48 per cent of Calgary’s non-downtown distribution
system uses a technology called Distribution
Automation. This system has saved an estimated
30 million minutes of outage time over the past
10 years. Distribution Automation is self-healing and
uses SCADA (supervisory control and data acquisition)
systems to detect a fault, automatically isolate it
and rapidly restore the system.
INTELLIGENT DEVICES
Similar to Distribution Automation in Alberta,
Versant Power has installed 65 intelligent devices in
Maine since 2019. They require no operator, and they
automatically detect a fault, isolate it, and rapidly
restore the system.
SYSTEM AVERAGE INTERRUPTION DURATION INDEX (SAIDI)
hours
SAIDI reflects the cumulative duration (in hours) of sustained
repair outages experienced by the average customer in a year.
On average, our customers experience less than 30 minutes of
power interruption during one year, while customers of EC member
companies experience, on average, seven hours of outages per year.
SYSTEM AVERAGE INTERRUPTION FREQUENCY INDEX (SAIFI)
number of interruptions per customer
SAIFI reflects the number of power outages lasting longer than five
minutes experienced by the average customer in a year. On average,
our customers experience fewer than one outage per year.
RELIABILITY STATISTICS — ENMAX POWER
2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
0.0
8.0
EC member average 2016 – 2018: 7.3
0.47 0.54 0.42 0.47 0.53
2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
0.0
3.0 EC member average 2016 – 2018: 2.8
0.64
0.80 0.72
0.54 0.62
RELIABILITY STATISTICS — VERSANT POWER UNIT 2018 2019 2020 2021 CHANGE
System Average Interruption Duration Index (SAIDI¹) hours 6.62 5.04 5.03 3.63 -45%
System Average Interruption Frequency Index (SAIFI²) # interruptions per
customer 2.52 1.96 2.27 1.97 -22%
Customer Average Interruption Duration Index
(CAIDI³), inclusive of major event days hours 2.63 2.58 2.21 1.84 -30%
¹ SAIDI represents the total duration of a sustained interruption per average customer during a predefined period of time. A sustained interruption has a duration greater than or equal to five minutes.
² SAIFI represents how often the average customer experiences a sustained interruption over a predefined period of time. A sustained interruption has a duration greater than or equal to five minutes.
³ CAIDI represents the average hours of service interruption for customers who experience a service interruption. The Institute of Electrical Electronics Engineers defines a ‘sustained’ outage as one that is five minutes or longer. This is a known distinction from Canadian utilities.
ENMAX 2021
ENVIRONMENTAL, SOCIAL
& GOVERNANCE REPORT CEO LET TER ESG SCORECARD ABOUT ENMAX SOCIAL GOVERNANCE TCFD APPENDICES
23
ENVIRONMENT
PROGRESS IN 2021
Adapting to the pace of change in our industry while
maintaining a reliable and resilient grid requires
innovative thinking and concerted investment. Last
year, we set a target to invest $60 million by 2030 to
enable a more resilient grid while maintaining our
reliability levels. We remain dedicated to this goal and
have allocated $4.5 million in the first year.
Acting today to enable the grid
of tomorrow
We invest in innovation to make the grid more flexible,
support lower carbon power generation and adapt to
changing customer needs.
TESTING SMART METER TECHNOLOGY
ENMAX Power is running a pilot project to test smart
meters (known as Advanced Metering Infrastructure,
or AMI) in a few Calgary communities to improve
our metering capability and provide customers with
actionable insights on their energy consumption.
Read more on page 58.
PILOTING RESIDENTIAL BATTERY STORAGE
ENMAX Power is working with a small number of
customers in targeted areas of Calgary where there
is potential for congestion on the grid. We are looking
at ways to work with customers that have solar
photovoltaic (PV) installations, possibly combined with
electric vehicle charging, to install residential batteries
so they can store that power and then either use it in
their home or export it back to the grid.
SUPPORTING SOLAR MICRO-GENERATION
In 2022, we are relaunching our residential and small
commercial solar program to support customers’
demand for renewable power. Read more in the
Customer Emissions section of this report.
PREPARING FOR ELECTRIC VEHICLE ADOPTION
Electric vehicle (EV) adoption is increasing rapidly
and EV charging (mostly done at home or work) will
increase electricity demand for utilities like ours. Since
2019, we have been progressing our understanding of
EV charging behaviours. Read more in the sidebar
about our Charge Up pilot.
CHARGE UP PILOT: SUPPORTING
TRANSPORTATION ELECTRIFICATION
EVs are no longer a distant conversation—the
Canadian federal government has set a mandatory
target for new light-duty cars and trucks to be zeroemission
EVs by 2035. Adjusting the grid to this rapid
shift requires investing in innovation like Charge Up,
our EV charging pilot, which is helping us understand
how Calgarians use EVs and the impact on our
electricity system.
Phase one of the pilot was focused on charger
installations and baseline charging behaviour. We
provided customer rebates for the installation of 35
residential chargers and customers agreed to share
their charging data with ENMAX for five years. In this
phase, we observed that EV charge times generally
coincide with evening peak electricity demand and
that short duration charging is common.
Building on these findings, we launched the second
phase to understand the factors that influence charging
behaviour (i.e., education and/or incentives) and to
test smart charging, the concept of using an intelligent
approach to decide when and where people charge
their vehicles. We developed a randomized trial to test
the effectiveness of smart charging using two different
incentive structures against a control group. The trial is
Alberta’s first smart charging program that will reward
customers for choosing to charge at times that benefit
the grid. We hope to use these findings to develop
future programs that incentivize EV charging behaviour
that optimizes the use of our distribution system.
STORY
WANT TO LEARN MORE?
Click here to watch a video about
our Charge Up pilot program.
ENMAX 2021
ENVIRONMENTAL, SOCIAL
& GOVERNANCE REPORT CEO LET TER ESG SCORECARD ABOUT ENMAX SOCIAL GOVERNANCE TCFD APPENDICES
24
ENVIRONMENT
Dedicated to meeting our customers’ changing
needs, ENMAX is working to solve a problem impacting
electricity grids across North America—enabling
customers on secondary networks to export excess
electricity back to the grid.
A secondary network is a complex power grid with
a web of multiple parallel sources of power to each
customer. These specialized networks are used to
supply electricity to high-density communities requiring
high reliability. Within Calgary, ENMAX Power has
four secondary networks (CF Chinook Centre, North
Hill Centre, Westbrook Mall and the downtown core).
Customers connected to a secondary network rarely
experience interruptions in power, but the existing
design of these systems does not allow customers
who own electricity generation to export excess power
back to the grid. Although this is done for safety and
reliability reasons, it creates a technical barrier to
adopting distributed generation in these areas.
ENMAX Power is the first utility in Canada to develop
and demonstrate a solution to this complex technical
challenge through a multi-year project funded in part
by Natural Resources Canada and Alberta Innovates.
In collaboration with Cadillac Fairview (CF), the
project will test the connection of a solar installation
at CF Chinook Centre, the largest shopping complex
in Calgary, onto ENMAX Power’s specialized
secondary network to enable two-way power flow
of renewable forms of energy.
In April 2021, the project took an important step forward
when we began construction of the 800 kW DC onsite
solar installation on the CF Chinook Centre rooftop.
Construction of the systems that allow for electricity
export was completed in the first quarter of 2022,
after which we began the final phase of testing and
monitoring of the two-way power flow. The technology,
if proven successful, will help remove technical and
financial barriers to distributed generation, giving
residential and commercial customers in urban settings
more choice in how they generate and use electricity,
while building the resiliency of the grid.
SPOTLIGHT
Enabling customers to export
renewable power to the grid
PROJECT TIMELINE
2019 – Modelling and design
2020 – Procurement and testing
2021 – Procurement and construction
2022 – Monitoring and testing
2018 – Project planning
ENMAX 2021
ENVIRONMENTAL, SOCIAL
& GOVERNANCE REPORT
25
CEO LET TER ESG SCORECARD ABOUT ENMAX ENVIRONMENT SOCIAL GOVERNANCE TCFD APPENDICES
WHY IT MATTERS TO ENMAX
Reliable power generation and delivery depends on
both maintaining our assets and on restoring power
when outages or emergencies occur. The last two
years have intensified our resolve to enhance our
resiliency and ensure business continuity and power
delivery through a variety of crises.
OUR APPROACH
We use the internationally recognized Incident Command
System (ICS) to manage our emergency response.
ICS is a standardized command and control system
used to manage emergency incidents. We maintain a
regularly reviewed Incident Management Plan, which
contains all emergency response plans and protocols.
Our emergency preparedness is tailored by our power
generation and transmission and distribution teams:
Power generation
Emergency preparedness at ENMAX Energy means
ensuring our generation facility control centre, field
and power plant employees are equipped to respond
safely, while maintaining compliance to all legislative
requirements of the Alberta Interconnected Electrical
System. Our employees receive emergency response
training as part of their operational training and during
regular emergency exercises. Each year we conduct a
combination of full-scale/virtual tabletop exercises, and
pandemic-type exercises are now part of our scenarios.
Transmission and distribution
ENMAX Power is a partner member of the Calgary
Emergency Management Agency (CEMA), which plans
and coordinates emergency services and resources
during major emergencies and disasters in Calgary. We
participate in all their drills, exercises and preparedness
planning, along with our neighbouring utilities. This
collaboration supports public and staff safety, minimizes
damage to electrical infrastructure, and allows for
faster recovery and return to normal operations,
resulting in less disruption to our customers. As a key
CEMA member, we have seats at their Emergency
Operations Centre, which opens during disasters or
major emergencies and acts as The City of Calgary’s
coordination centre. To test the real-time effectiveness
of our response, we also complete one full-scale exercise
per year with one of our closest mutual assistance
partners, EPCOR. These exercises are multi-agency,
multi-jurisdictional activities involving the mobilization
of emergency personnel, equipment and resources, as
if a real incident had occurred. Our aim is to complete
one emergency response exercise per quarter.
We completed 25 emergency exercises
in 2021 and advanced our preparedness
for extreme weather events such as
floods and snowstorms.
PROGRESS IN 2021
In 2021, we completed 25 emergency exercises across
ENMAX. The exercises included a combination of
full-scale and/or virtual tabletop exercises at Shepard
Energy Centre, Calgary Energy Centre and Cavalier
Energy Centre. At Versant Power, 12 emergency
response exercises were completed in 2021.
Preparing for extreme weather events
In 2021, Calgary saw both record low and record high
temperatures and Western Canada experienced a wide
range of extreme events including forest fires, extreme
winds and severe floods. Although our assets were not
significantly impacted, we dedicated time and focus
to prepare for these types of events. During the year,
ENMAX Power held three weather-related tabletop
exercises, two related to flood and one simulating
a large snowstorm. Tabletop emergency exercises
are sessions in which team members discuss their
roles during an emergency and their responses
to a particular situation, with a facilitator guiding
participants through the scenario. Our exercises
involved representatives from field services, senior
leadership, communications and system operations.
Some of the learnings from these exercises included
improvements to our ICS organizational structure to
enable more effective two-way communication and
providing better support to our system operators
and trouble dispatchers to assign jobs to crews for
secondary outages that can occur during storms.
Emergency
preparedness and
crisis management
ENMAX 2021
ENVIRONMENTAL, SOCIAL
& GOVERNANCE REPORT CEO LET TER ESG SCORECARD ABOUT ENMAX SOCIAL GOVERNANCE TCFD APPENDICES
26
ENVIRONMENT
WHY IT MATTERS TO ENMAX
We recognize water is a precious resource that must
be used responsibly. We carefully manage our water
withdrawals and monitor our wastewater disposal.
OUR APPROACH
The majority of our water use is for essential power
generation processes—intake water is used for cooling
purposes in cooling towers and the remainder is
purified onsite to create steam in our combinedcycle
power plants. Combined-cycle facilities extract
waste heat from the gas turbine exhaust and use it to
create high pressure steam which produces additional
electricity when allowed to depressurize. Our water
reduction initiatives have been focused on reducing
facility water intensity by:
Reducing potable water use
We strive to minimize potable water use by using as
much reclaimed water in our operations as practically
possible. Reclaimed water is wastewater that has been
processed for reuse for an additional purpose before
passing back into the water cycle. By design, our largest
generating facility, Shepard Energy Centre, uses 100
per cent reclaimed water from The City of Calgary’s
Bonnybrook Wastewater Treatment Plant for all its
power generation needs. Each year, this saves the
plant from having to draw nearly six million cubic
meters (m³) of freshwater from the Bow River.
Optimizing our water use
We seek to optimize water use at our operated facilities
in the following ways:
SHEPARD ENERGY CENTRE
While this facility already uses reclaimed water, we
have sought to further optimize its water use. The water
used in a power plant declines in quality each time it
runs through the facility, where every pass through
the cooling towers increases the concentration of
dissolved substances. After three years of research,
observation and innovative lab testing, we found the
optimal operating efficiency of the cooling towers.
This work, which was recognized by Electricity Canada,
has increased the reuse cycles from 3.5 to 5, while still
maintaining all cooling water chemistry within required
concentration limits. This initiative has reduced the
plant’s annual wastewater volume by 24 to 28 per cent
(compared to 2017 values) and reduces wastewater
discharged by 450,000 m³ each year.
CALGARY ENERGY CENTRE
We examined our water use at this facility and
determined that the plant is already optimizing its water
use to the extent possible with existing technology.
CAVALIER ENERGY CENTRE
This facility is located just east of Strathmore and gets its
water from an irrigation canal connected to the Bow River.
While using water from this source presents challenges
due to source water quality, Cavalier uses a complex
process to recycle and treat water at a very high rate of
efficiency, leaving very little that cannot be recycled.
Water quality
We comply with all City of Calgary bylaw requirements
for wastewater disposal in Calgary, which applies to
Shepard Energy Centre and Calgary Energy Centre.
This includes requirements for handling, treatment
and disposal. At Cavalier, wastewater is reused to
a point where it can no longer be treated and is
disposed of using deep well injection in accordance
with provincial regulations. More than 99 per cent
of ENMAX’s wastewater is treated at The City of
Calgary’s wastewater treatment plants.
Water use
and quality WATER USE
million m³ | m³/MWh
Most of the water we use is non-potable and for power generation
cooling processes.
WATER WITHDRAWAL
~70% of our water withdrawn is reclaimed (non-potable) water
WATER CONSUMPTION AND DISCHARGE
~80% of water evaporates through the cooling process
~20% of the total volume is returned to the municipal sewer
system after use
~0.2% is water that can no longer be reused and is disposed
of through deep well injection
OUR PERFORMANCE
2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
Reclaimed (non-potable)
Freshwater withdrawn
Water consumption intensity
0.0
10.0
0.00
0.80
0.71
1.50 1.97 2.09 2.10 1.58
5.62
5.54 5.52 6.00
5.37
7.12 7.51 7.61
8.11
6.95
0.70 0.69 0.69 0.67
ENMAX 2021
ENVIRONMENTAL, SOCIAL
& GOVERNANCE REPORT CEO LET TER ESG SCORECARD ABOUT ENMAX SOCIAL GOVERNANCE TCFD APPENDICES
27
ENVIRONMENT
WHY IT MATTERS TO ENMAX
ENMAX Energy operates power generation facilities
in Calgary and the surrounding urban area and takes
its role seriously in helping to protect local air quality.
In addition to GHG emissions, our operations generate
other air emissions that can impact air quality.
OUR APPROACH
We diligently track and report air emissions from our
power generation facilities. We are working to reduce
these emissions by incorporating emissions reduction
technologies, adhering to best practices and maintaining
our commitment to continuous improvement.
Nitrogen oxides
We operate our facilities well below our allowable
nitrogen oxide (NOx) levels, which are facility-based
NOx limits granted by Alberta Environment and Parks
(AEP) and provincial regulations. To maintain these
emissions levels, we utilize a combination of pre and
post combustion NOx reduction technologies at our
natural gas-fuelled power generation facilities. Two of
our power generation facilities use post-combustion
exhaust gas treatment (ammonia injection) to reduce
NOx emissions. Crossfield Energy Centre has installed
low-NOx combustors and Cavalier Energy Centre uses
water injection into the turbine to control NOx.
Sulfur oxides
Sulfur oxides (SOx) are no longer a significant source
of our overall emissions since the termination of our
coal-fired Power Purchase Arrangements. Our SOx
emissions levels vary in relation to the volume of our
power generation output (see data in the sidebar).
Partnerships to protect air quality
We participate as an industry member of the Clean Air
Strategic Alliance (CASA) and Calgary Region Airshed
Zone (CRAZ) to represent our power generation assets.
CASA is a multi-stakeholder partnership created to
help manage air quality in Alberta. The board has
representatives from industry, government and nongovernment
organizations. CRAZ monitors, analyzes,
and provides information on air quality and develops
strategies to manage air quality issues within the
Calgary Region Airshed Zone.
Air quality
NOx EMISSIONS
tonnes | kg/MWh
We maintain NOx emissions levels from our power generation facilities
well below our allowable NOx levels. However, to reduce excessive
wear on equipment, we have had to reduce ammonia injection (one of
our NOx reduction methods) and, therefore, have seen an increase in
absolute NOx emissions levels when compared to previous years.
We generate other air emissions in smaller quantities and while there
are no operational approval limits attached to these emissions, ENMAX
tracks these quantities annually.
OTHER AIR
EMISSIONS (TONNES) 2017 2017 2019 2020 2021
SOx 13 16 16 17 13
Particulate matter (PM₁₀) 25 14 15 15 12
Note: Air emissions data includes only our power generation assets over which we
have operational control.
OUR PERFORMANCE
NOx emissions from natural gas-fuelled power generation
2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
Aggregated approved NOx emissions
NOx Intensity
0
8,000
1,203
1,657 1,612
1,926 2,102
0.26
0.23
0.25
0.27
0.24
0.0
0.3
ENMAX 2021
ENVIRONMENTAL, SOCIAL
& GOVERNANCE REPORT CEO LET TER ESG SCORECARD ABOUT ENMAX SOCIAL GOVERNANCE TCFD APPENDICES
28
ENVIRONMENT
WHY IT MATTERS TO ENMAX
Environmental protection and stewardship are integral
components of our strategy embedded across all
aspects of our business. We endeavour to provide
environmentally responsible energy solutions to the
communities we serve.
OUR APPROACH
At ENMAX, we conduct our business with respect
for living species and the land around our operations.
We have an established environmental management
system, clear data collection and reporting processes,
and strong internal procedures to manage our
environmental risks. Our environmental management
system is modeled after ISO 14001:2015, an international
standard for environmental management.
Land stewardship
ENMAX Power operates over 38,000 distribution pad
mounted transformers, 113 high voltage substation
power transformers and 43 substations. While we
continually work to prevent spills in our daily operations,
we do experience some releases. In 2021, we had
three significant¹ transformer spills. Two distribution
transformer spills, one caused by third-party damage
and one as a result of a faulty drain valve. The third
spill involved a substation transformer release due to
a radiator fin failure. Some of the ways we are working
to reduce spills and improve our land stewardship
practices include:
PROACTIVE SPILL PREVENTION AND RESPONSE
We have established routine inspection programs
to assess the health and condition of our generation,
distribution and transmission equipment. As part of
the inspection program, the assessment of oil-filled
equipment is critical as leaks can lead to equipment
failure, electrical outages, and costly site clean-up and/
or remediation. When minor leaks are identified, we
increase inspection frequency to allow for ongoing
monitoring and assessment of the equipment’s leak
severity. In instances where a leak condition progresses
or a major leak or equipment damage is identified, we
schedule the repair or replacement of the equipment,
including any site clean-up or remediation required.
We also have spill response and reporting procedures
in place to address spills due to equipment failure,
including damage and releases caused by third parties.
HYDROVAC SLURRY MANAGEMENT
We use hydro vacuum excavation, or hydrovac, to
safely excavate around buried cables that need repairs.
Hydrovac uses high-pressure water to loosen the soil
and dig a hole. The muddy excavated material, or slurry,
is then suctioned into a tank mounted on a specialized
truck and taken to a designated facility. Although a
common industry practice, new regulatory guidance
has highlighted additional required environmental
considerations. In 2021, ENMAX completed significant
refining of our processes around pre-characterizing
soils prior to hydrovac excavation. By clearly identifying
contaminants in soil, we can determine the best means
of disposal or potential for reuse.
GOATS PROVIDE NATURAL WEED CONTROL
In June 2021, our Cavalier Energy Centre hosted
270 goats to graze on weeds as a means of
environmentally friendly weed control. Goats can
safely eat noxious weeds and help regenerate the
soil by aerating, mulching, and fertilizing.
The herd from Goats for Weeds returned to Cavalier
for a second go-round later in the summer. After
repeat visits at our facility, the weed management
program with the herd will shift from initial clearing to
basic maintenance, saving time, money, and reducing
environmental impact compared to traditional
herbicide treatments.
¹ A significant spill is defined as more than 500 litres, in alignment with industry standards (including Electricity Canada).
Land and
biodiversity
STORY
ENMAX 2021
ENVIRONMENTAL, SOCIAL
& GOVERNANCE REPORT CEO LET TER ESG SCORECARD ABOUT ENMAX SOCIAL GOVERNANCE TCFD APPENDICES
29
ENVIRONMENT
Protecting biodiversity
Birds often use power poles or substation equipment
for perching, roosting and nesting. Birds may also nest
in areas where project or maintenance work will be
carried out. Across our operations, ENMAX works to
protect birds while helping to ensure the reliability of
our services by identifying high-risk areas, conducting
nest sweeps prior to work, and delaying work to
accommodate nesting periods.
PREVENTING DISTURBANCE TO NESTING BIRDS
To avoid disturbing avian nesting and breeding habitat
we regularly perform nest sweeps prior to project
work. Nest sweeps involve a search of the immediate
area by trained biologists to look for breeding birds
and nests. After completing a sweep, if nesting birds
are discovered, we identify locations where we can
complete our work without disruption to the birds
and we relocate our crews to these areas. In 2021, we
completed several sweeps as part of our work on the
Calgary Ring Road project. Many different nesting sites
were identified and we were able to accommodate the
nesting period without any incidents.
Across our operations, we work to
protect birds while helping to ensure
the reliability of our services.
NESTING PLATFORMS
In Maine, around coastal areas, ospreys tend to build
nests at the top of utility poles, which presents a danger
to the birds and raises the risk of disruptions to electric
service. After a 2020 incident when an osprey built a nest
on a utility pole in Lamoine, Versant Power crews wanted
to prevent a future safety risk to the birds as well as
the public. As a result, Versant employees designed
and built an alternate osprey nesting platform close by.
The platform was built with osprey preferences in mind
and required Versant’s environmental team as well as
the expertise of outside environmental groups, including
the Maine Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife.
Because ospreys like to be at the tallest point above
the water, Versant crews replaced an existing utility
pole with a taller one. Crews installed a square platform
with no coverings, as the birds prefer to look down and
hunt for fish below without any obstructions overhead.
The osprey camera (powered by EarthCam) is powered
entirely by solar energy and is situated on a newly built
osprey platform overlooking the Mud Creek.
As Calgary has several fish-bearing waterbodies,
osprey are common and ENMAX maintains and
monitors 17 nesting platforms to provide safe places
for osprey to nest.
ENMAX 2021
ENVIRONMENTAL, SOCIAL
& GOVERNANCE REPORT CEO LET TER ESG SCORECARD ABOUT ENMAX SOCIAL GOVERNANCE TCFD APPENDICES